---
title: 1.3. Matrix Multiplication as Transformation
draft: false
date: 2023-12-26
---
In this section, I will go through different types of matrices and visualize what transformation happens when we apply that matrix to vectors. 

Obviously, this can be generalized to any vector space of $\mathbb{C}^n$. But for the ease of visualization I will keep it limited to $\mathbb{R}^2$.  In addition, based on the discussion in [[1.1. Matrix Vector Multiplication|Matrix Vector Multiplication]] and [[1.2. Linearity|Linearity]]  it is pretty obvious, we should give importance to the transformation of standard basis vectors.


> [!Caution] Caution about terminology
> Note that some of the terminology used in this page is not standarized. Word like "Stretching" or "Scaling" can be interpreted in different ways and sometimes you might need to perform some mental gymnastics to adapt.



## Identity matrix

$$
 I_n = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & \dots & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & \dots & 0 \\ \vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\ 0 & 0 & \dots & 1 \end{bmatrix} 
$$
By definition, identity matrix is a square matrix with $1$ along the diagonals.
When we apply identity matrix to any vector in $\mathbb{R}^n$,  nothing actually happens and the vectors stays where it was originally. The reason behind that is, every column of the identity matrix is the standard basis vectors. 

## Diagonal matrices

A diagonal matrix has non-zero diagonal elements ($d_{ii}\neq 0$). All the off-diagonal elements are zero ($d_{ij}=0; i\neq j$). And, by definition we will consider it a square matrix.

$$
D = \begin{bmatrix} d_{11} & 0 & 0 & \dots & 0 \\ 0 & d_{22} & 0 & \dots & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & d_{33} & \dots & 0 \\ \vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & \dots & d_{nn} \end{bmatrix}
$$

### Scaling Transformations 


#### Stretching transformation 
Let's take an example matrix to  understand what happens in the case 



#### Shrinking Transformation




## References
1. Kernel, Visual. _Visualize Different Matrices Part1 | SEE Matrix, Chapter 1_. 14 Mar. 2022, youtu.be/7Gtxd-ew4lk.
2. Gundersen, Gregory. _A Geometrical Understanding of Matrices_. 24 Oct. 2018, gregorygundersen.com/blog/2018/10/24/matrices/.